All right.
NOTE CONF
Welcome to today's lecture.
Uh, today we don't have attendance.
NOTE CONF
So this, uh, this QR code should take you straight
to the, um, exercise book club, and, uh, just let
NOTE CONF
me check.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The projector has shifted a bit, but hopefully the slides
are still visible there, so no harm in having it
NOTE CONF
there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Wonderful.
Um, start logging in into the book club, please.
NOTE CONF
But before we go there, uh, we need to finish
what we were doing yesterday because we had two statements
NOTE CONF
that we left, uh, unfinished.
So we're going to go through that, and then we
NOTE CONF
will start talking about eigenvalues and eigenspaces and eigenvalues, multiplicity
and how they play into each other.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, you don't have the book club questions Students
today.
NOTE CONF
You've.
You've had your chance to have a look at them
NOTE CONF
yesterday.
Um, but let's pick it up where we left.
NOTE CONF
And I realised that I need also statement three.
So statement three in the last, uh, in the last
NOTE CONF
exercise yesterday was the last thing we saw together.
And it asks to prove that if A is diagonalisable,
NOTE CONF
then it's similar to its transposed.
And yesterday we saw that this was in fact true.
NOTE CONF
And we saw how to get it.
And the idea was, okay, let's start with the definition
NOTE CONF
of diagonal diagonalise ability, which essentially means that the matrix
is similar to the diagonalised version of it, the matrix
NOTE CONF
that is diagonal and has the eigenvector, the eigenvalues on
the diagonal.
NOTE CONF
And then we can invert that the relation.
And if we calculate the the diagonal matrix of the
NOTE CONF
transpose, we find that it can be written this way.
P minus one t dt, which in which p and
NOTE CONF
p minus one are the exact matrices that appear for
the diagonalization of A, and then we notice that d
NOTE CONF
t is equal to d because transposing matrices leave the
diagonal unchanged.
NOTE CONF
And so from here we can then substitute this expression
here and reorganising, we see that.
NOTE CONF
In fact we can find a new invertible matrix p
p transposed, for which the similarity definition between 80 and
NOTE CONF
A holds.
And we say okay, p t is invertible because if
NOTE CONF
P is invertible, then its transpose is also invertible, and
the product of two invertible matrices is itself and is
NOTE CONF
itself invertible.
Now, why do I Uh, redo this, because the next
NOTE CONF
statement that we saw, well, that we didn't see yesterday,
rather was that if A is Diagonalisable and B similar
NOTE CONF
to A, then B has non-zero eigenvalues.
And the reason why I read it, number three is
NOTE CONF
that this is also true.
And the proof is essentially exactly the same.
NOTE CONF
We use different matrices.
We use different properties.
NOTE CONF
But if you write it down, um, it looks and
feels exactly like, uh, like like the proof before we
NOTE CONF
start by, uh, the Diagonalisable definition, uh, a similar to
it's diagonal form.
NOTE CONF
D we invert that and then instead of of uh,
plugging in this D into some, uh, into the, uh,
NOTE CONF
diagonalisable property for a transpose, we use, uh, the similarity,
uh, definition instead.
NOTE CONF
And then we can, uh, uh.
We can do basically the same substitution.
NOTE CONF
And if we work, uh, again with the same way
with the associativity and remembering, then taking the inverse of
NOTE CONF
a product is like taking the product of the inverses
in the opposite order.
NOTE CONF
We find something, um, that, uh, um, that show us
that both A and B reduces to the same diagonal
NOTE CONF
matrix D.
And so because A had non-zero eigenvalue to begin with
NOTE CONF
for hypothesis, then also B must follow.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, this is the explicit proof.
Um, we can also take a shortcut if we remember
NOTE CONF
theorem I think it was 5.5.1.
I'm going by memory, but I think it was that
NOTE CONF
which says that, uh, if A similar to B, then
they have the same eigenvalues.
NOTE CONF
And if it is diagonalisable, it has non-zero eigenvalues, and
so b must have the same.
NOTE CONF
And this is essentially how we build the proof for
that theorem.
NOTE CONF
So going back to first principles rather than using one
of the results in your in your bit okay.
NOTE CONF
And then the last statement which was the only one
that I marked read as the most difficult one, was
NOTE CONF
that if a similar to B, then all powers of
A are similar to the same powers of B, and
NOTE CONF
that is true for all integers positive or negative or
zero.
NOTE CONF
And the reason why I marked this red is not
because it's a.
NOTE CONF
The proof itself is particularly difficult.
It's because of the first step.
NOTE CONF
You need an intuition that you can use the divide
and conquer method that we that we talked about last
NOTE CONF
week and here, how would you split the the big
heart proof into smaller, simpler cases?
NOTE CONF
Any.
Anyone has any idea about how I can split this
NOTE CONF
into simpler things to check?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Precisely, yes.
That is the natural thing.
NOTE CONF
So it turns out that this statement yesterday was true.
And the key idea here is that we can split
NOTE CONF
an equal zero and positive and negative.
And we it's good practice to start with the easiest
NOTE CONF
one first.
If n is equal zero then both matrices are the
NOTE CONF
identity.
Because a matrix raised to the zero power is the
NOTE CONF
identity.
And and so it's done.
NOTE CONF
Then for the case uh n greater than zero.
There's a key observation that we really need to prove.
NOTE CONF
I'm sorry.
This is a squared similar to b squared.
NOTE CONF
Um.
And why is that.
NOTE CONF
Well because if a similar to B then we can
write B this way.
NOTE CONF
And when we iterate b we write b squared as
b times p.
NOTE CONF
This becomes the product of this two.
And so by by regrouping p minus one p go
NOTE CONF
away.
And b square is similar to a squared through the
NOTE CONF
same matrix P that allows you to move from A
to B to begin with.
NOTE CONF
And so this shows that of course a squared is
similar to b squared.
NOTE CONF
And uh, if we can just redo everything with more
uh with more multiplication of the same matrix, we will
NOTE CONF
get uh p minus one p in between every copy
of A on the right hand side.
NOTE CONF
And so um, that shows it for all positive integers.
And what about negative integers?
NOTE CONF
Well, we.
The key observation for negative integers is that a to
NOTE CONF
the power of minus n can be written as the
inverse of a to the power of n, and uh.
NOTE CONF
We know from an exercise and I'm sure you've seen
this, is that if a similar to be their inverse
NOTE CONF
are also similar.
And so the case and less than zero or n
NOTE CONF
negative is exactly equal to the first part in which
you substitute b with its inverse and A with its
NOTE CONF
inverse.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So again this exercise was marked as hard because not
because the individual cases are particularly hard.
NOTE CONF
But if you try to approach it straight away for
any n uh then uh, you won't get you won't
NOTE CONF
get far because you can just prove it in one
go.
NOTE CONF
I mean, there might be a way, but I, I
can't, I can see it myself.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So once again, standard, um, technique for proving things in
NOTE CONF
mathematics.
Divide and conquer.
NOTE CONF
That was the point of this last part.
Question.
NOTE CONF
Do you have any questions about any of these statements
that we left over from yesterday?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, uh, this is the same slide as before, but
NOTE CONF
now I'm highlighting what we do today.
Um, I'm sure you've, uh, you have seen all of
NOTE CONF
this in the readings.
Uh, but before we start doing exercises, much like yesterday,
NOTE CONF
um, let's give out a couple of definitions that are
going to be very important in today's exercises.
NOTE CONF
First is the multiplicity of an eigenvalue.
So if lambda is an eigenvalue of a matrix A,
NOTE CONF
its multiplicity is the the the algebraic multiplicity of lambda
as a root of the characteristic polynomial okay.
NOTE CONF
So we've seen a theorem that the roots of the
of the characteristic polynomials are the eigenvalues of the matrix,
NOTE CONF
and that is the basis on which we can on
which we perform our typical calculation to find eigenvalues.
NOTE CONF
So to find the eigenvalues we solve the determinant of
a minus lambda I or x I minus a.
NOTE CONF
They're all equivalent formulation.
And the reason why that works is precisely that theorem.
NOTE CONF
Because the determinant of I minus a minus lambda I
is a method to write the characteristic polynomial of the
NOTE CONF
matrix and the roots.
We set the determinant equal to zero.
NOTE CONF
We solve and the roots are the eigenvalues.
And of course a polynomial.
NOTE CONF
You are all familiar with the number of solutions or
the multiplicity rather of the solutions of a polynomial, something
NOTE CONF
that looks, for example, like uh.
X minus a times x minus b uh equals zero.
NOTE CONF
Those both x will be equal to a and b,
and both will have multiplicity one.
NOTE CONF
And the multiplicity increase.
If we have something like this now b now A
NOTE CONF
has multiplicity equal to okay.
And we've seen that this factor is connected to the
NOTE CONF
fact that the characteristic polynomial factors completely and factors completely
means that it can be written all in this form
NOTE CONF
here of, uh, a succession of product of simple.
Right.
NOTE CONF
And just to be extra, extra clear.
Raising this to some power is allowed.
NOTE CONF
This is still completely factored.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
What is not allowed is to have terms that do
not factors, uh, any further.
NOTE CONF
So for example x squared plus one okay.
This is not allowed if, if the characteristic polynomial has
NOTE CONF
any of these type of terms that you can't reduce
any further into terms in which the x has power
NOTE CONF
one, then the characteristic polynomial does not factor completely.
And then we've seen a theorem that uh states that
NOTE CONF
if, uh, the characteristic polynomial factor is completely.
We have two equivalent to equivalent properties a being diagonalisable
NOTE CONF
and the dimension of the eigenspaces associated to each eigenvalue
being equal to the algebraic multiplicity of that eigenvalue.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so it's an if and only if if you
have something like this.
NOTE CONF
That theorem is not true.
And we will see an example okay.
NOTE CONF
It is required to have uh, uh, a completely, uh,
a completely factorised characteristic polynomial.
NOTE CONF
Uh, by the way, if the characteristic polynomial is not
completely factorised.
NOTE CONF
Is the matrix invertible or not?
If the if the characteristic polynomial is in this form.
NOTE CONF
Here, together with this, uh, with this factor here.
Now.
NOTE CONF
Can we find the diagonal form of the matrix.
Okay, we will see it later, but spoiler alert.
NOTE CONF
No, because we don't find enough eigenvalues to, uh, to,
um, to to diagonalise the matrix.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
We will see all of this in the following two
NOTE CONF
exercises.
So the first one is just, uh, to do something
NOTE CONF
that is slightly different than usual.
Instead of like, doing both true and false.
NOTE CONF
I've created a matching exercise, uh, of logical implications.
So on the left hand side, you have the hypothesis.
NOTE CONF
And on the right hand side you have thesis.
And then for some reason, this math bit didn't pick
NOTE CONF
up this.
This should be lambda.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then, um, yeah, it's your job to match
the numbers with the letters And as usual with these
NOTE CONF
things, there might be multiple that are allowed and we
will go through them together in a couple of minutes.
NOTE CONF
So discuss with your neighbours why you think some are
better than others as matches between the left and the
NOTE CONF
right.
And we'll pick it up in a couple of minutes.
NOTE CONF
I have, uh, approximately 30 answers so far.
If you can, uh, submit your answers now, we're going
NOTE CONF
to check them very quickly.
But in the meantime, without giving too much away.
NOTE CONF
Just a reminder of three results that we're going to
use to solve these.
NOTE CONF
These are three theorem that I lifted straight from your
reading.
NOTE CONF
Straight from part uh 5.5 of the of the book.
Um, essay is diagonalisable if and only if, uh, uh,
NOTE CONF
the eigenvectors spun around and uh, when, uh, when both
conditions, both equivalent conditions are satisfied.
NOTE CONF
So A is the is Diagonalisable.
Then if the matrix P is invertible, there exists, uh,
NOTE CONF
one.
Uh, sorry, there exists one matrix B, which is invertible,
NOTE CONF
and it's exactly the matrix of the eigenvectors put by
columns such that the matrix returns through similarity the diagonalised
NOTE CONF
version of a.
Okay, so that's the first result that that we use.
NOTE CONF
The second one is that if VN are the eigenvectors
uh with corresponding um eigenvalues lambda one, lambda two, lambda
NOTE CONF
n all distinct, uh, then uh, the set of the
eigenvectors is a linearly independent set.
NOTE CONF
And here another type of pair.
It should be a backslash that makes em both mathematics.
NOTE CONF
And finally, um, if uh which is really a consequence
of the previous two, if, uh, a matrix are n
NOTE CONF
times n has and distinct eigenvalues, then it's diagonalisable.
That is the second theorem, together with the first part
NOTE CONF
of the first.
Okay, 55 answers in the meantime 56.
NOTE CONF
Excellent.
Um, let's have a look at some of these statements.
NOTE CONF
Um.
If A is Diagonalisable.
NOTE CONF
Well, actually, let's have a look at the the answer
that you submitted.
NOTE CONF
Now, um, if A is diagonalisable in case of X
factor is completely, then the dimension of the eigenspace is
NOTE CONF
equal to the multiplicity for all lambdas.
Correct.
NOTE CONF
That was the first theorem that we saw earlier.
If A is triangular upper lower than the eigenvalues are
NOTE CONF
equal to the diagonal elements.
Yes absolutely.
NOTE CONF
And let's do the first three.
And then we're going to go through them a little
NOTE CONF
bit more systematically.
And if we can factor out a factor x minus
NOTE CONF
lambda to the power of n, then the then lambda
will be an eigenvalue.
NOTE CONF
Because setting x equal lambda makes the characteristic polynomial zero,
of course, and the multiplicity will be equal to the
NOTE CONF
exponent.
Absolutely.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so let's uh, give some more constructive proof rather
NOTE CONF
than say, uh oh.
It's just, uh, that that statement is uh, is obviously
NOTE CONF
true.
Let's start with the triangular matrix result.
NOTE CONF
Why are the eigenvalues equal to the diagonal entries?
Um, well, we can we can write down the eigenvalues
NOTE CONF
as the roots of the characteristic polynomial.
Nothing nothing new here.
NOTE CONF
And now we want to notice something that if A
is triangular then the matrix that appear inside here is
NOTE CONF
It's also triangular because when we take the matrix A
minus x that we use to calculate the characteristic polynomial,
NOTE CONF
and the only elements that are modified are the diagonal
ones, the ones that are on the diagonal gets a
NOTE CONF
minus x.
Component after them, and all other elements of the matrix
NOTE CONF
are completely untouched.
So the resulting matrix of which we're calculating the determinant
NOTE CONF
is also triangular.
And we've seen in week four that a determinant of
NOTE CONF
a triangular matrix and is just the product of the
of the diagonal terms.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So uh, I'm not sure you've seen this symbol.
NOTE CONF
If you haven't, this is a good time to grow
familiar with this.
NOTE CONF
Uh, this is just like the sigma for the sum
where you sum all the terms, uh, the at various
NOTE CONF
values for I.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
So if you have, uh, the sum over, I equal
one n of x I.
NOTE CONF
This is x one plus x two plus six, three,
six, four and so on and so forth.
NOTE CONF
This symbol here works exactly the same way, but instead
of having a sum, this is the Greek letter sigma.
NOTE CONF
For some this is the letter the Greek letter capital
pi for product.
NOTE CONF
So this would be x one times x two times
x three times.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So what I'm writing there is just that the determinant
NOTE CONF
is the product of all the of the diagonal elements
of the matrices of the matrix, which are the I
NOTE CONF
minus one times x.
Coming from the fact that I've subtracted the identity times
NOTE CONF
x.
Okay, so what are the eigenvalues?
NOTE CONF
I'm sorry, what are the roots of this polynomial?
Well, all the roots of this polynomial are exactly the
NOTE CONF
A's, because if x is equal to one of the
A's, it would cancel out one of these factors here,
NOTE CONF
which are written this way here.
And the whole polynomial would be would be easier.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so the roots of the of the characteristic polynomial
are exactly the diagonal entries of A, and therefore the
NOTE CONF
diagonal entries are the eigenvalues.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is a bit more constructive than what we've
done before.
NOTE CONF
Um okay.
Therefore the eigenvalues are lambda equal.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Next up there was uh a uh a statement that
was this one.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Which was if the eigenvectors Vectors span.
NOTE CONF
If the span of the eigenvector is a proper subset
of n, so not equal to n, it's A, it's
NOTE CONF
a proper subset.
Then a singular um.
NOTE CONF
Correct.
Absolutely correct.
NOTE CONF
And um, once again, being singular is the opposite of
being diagonalisable it means that the determinant is zero.
NOTE CONF
And so this is just, uh, uh, negation of the
if and only if um theorem that we've seen before
NOTE CONF
that if A is diagonalisable, then the eigenvectors span the
entire RN.
NOTE CONF
But now the eigenvectors do not span the entire n.
And so it's it's not invertible.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Next up the last one I think that we see
NOTE CONF
uh, more more constructively here.
Uh oh no.
NOTE CONF
There's, there's a couple more, actually.
Okay, well, this one, that's not much to say.
NOTE CONF
We've pretty much said it out loud earlier.
If we can factor out a term x minus lambda
NOTE CONF
and then then of course, uh, the oh it was,
it was right here.
NOTE CONF
And then the multiplicity of lambda is n oh that
is.
NOTE CONF
And then I thought that was A0I misread.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, this is just the definition of multiplicity, right.
There's nothing going on here.
NOTE CONF
Um, the, um, the multiplicity of an eigenvector of an
eigenvalue is the number of is the, the algebraic multiplicity
NOTE CONF
of that eigenvalue as a root of this polynomial okay.
And if A is diagonalisable in k factors completely, then
NOTE CONF
the dimension of the eigen space is equal to the
to the multiplicity.
NOTE CONF
That is the theorem that we saw before referenced in
the book as uh uh theorem 5.5.6.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Do you have any questions about any of these statements,
NOTE CONF
any of these combinations?
Um, this one was also an allowed one.
NOTE CONF
As I mentioned, these questions in book club are not
perfect.
NOTE CONF
This is an equivalent condition for not being diagonalisable, hence
singular.
NOTE CONF
So both of these uh, matching are are fine.
I just picked another one.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Which one does not consider.
NOTE CONF
Which one goes to matches?
Uh, let's see if the determinant of A is equal
NOTE CONF
than zero or is different than zero.
Um.
NOTE CONF
I think it was, uh.
Oh, that's a touch screen.
NOTE CONF
Interesting.
I think it was this one.
NOTE CONF
Right?
Because if the owner.
NOTE CONF
Because that is invertible, uh, then a.
Singular.
NOTE CONF
No, then m o none.
Actually, uh, this was supposed to be if the determinant
NOTE CONF
is, uh.
Right.
NOTE CONF
And so it's not equivalent to this hypothesis here because
we're not sure whether or not the factor is completely.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Let's see what I put in.
NOTE CONF
Um, the determinant is.
Zero.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
It was supposed to go with this one.
NOTE CONF
Did I get that right?
Uh, we.
NOTE CONF
Said that is diagonalisable.
If And it says.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, yeah, uh, yeah.
No, you're right, you're probably.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, you've probably spotted something wrong either equal to zero
or equal here.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
You're right.
NOTE CONF
Sorry about that.
Any any other questions.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
I feel like I've been in space which for all
NOTE CONF
of.
The eigenspace.
NOTE CONF
Well each eigenvector each eigenvector creates an eigenspace.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
So e lambda a is the eigenspace created by the
eigenvectors associated to lambda as an eigenvalue.
NOTE CONF
Right?
It's the one for which lambda is the corresponding eigenvalue.
NOTE CONF
So in other words, it would be the x.
It's this one is the span of all the axis
NOTE CONF
vectors for which a x is equal to lambda x.
There could be multiple or not.
NOTE CONF
Only one.
Eigenvector.
NOTE CONF
That's the eigen.
Vector.
NOTE CONF
It depends on the matrix.
If two.
NOTE CONF
If.
If an eigen.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
If an eigen.
NOTE CONF
Um.
If an eigenvalue has a multiplicity two, it could be
NOTE CONF
that two different eigenvectors correspond to that.
And that's that's why this dimension will be equal to
NOTE CONF
two.
And the multiplicity of that eigenvalue in turn will be
NOTE CONF
two.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, for, for for the dimension of the eigenspace to
be two you need to independent eigenvectors corresponding to that
NOTE CONF
eigenvalue.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Two linearly independent ones.
Otherwise the span of that eigenvalue of that eigenvector can
NOTE CONF
never be more than one.
If you only have one vector as a basis of
NOTE CONF
that subspace.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So um, next up, um, question two.
NOTE CONF
This one I couldn't I couldn't turn it into anything
else.
NOTE CONF
So this is a good old true and false four
statements.
NOTE CONF
I didn't classify them in hard and non hard, although
the last one is the one that's a little bit,
NOTE CONF
um, a little bit more interesting perhaps just because, uh,
you probably haven't seen this.
NOTE CONF
Uh, the other ones are applications of what we've seen.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Five more minutes to walk, to work through, um, the
ones that you, um, that you feel comfortable with.
NOTE CONF
And then, um, then we're going to go over them
together.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I have almost 50 answers.
If you submit them, we can start going through them
NOTE CONF
together.
Okay?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Let's see the first one for which you're mostly confident
NOTE CONF
that it's true, but I have purposefully omitted a condition
there.
NOTE CONF
You don't know that the characteristic polynomial factor is completely
for that matrix, right?
NOTE CONF
That is an equivalency only if the characteristic polynomial factors
completely.
NOTE CONF
And for that reason why we can produce a counterexample
to that.
NOTE CONF
We can produce a matrix for which the dimension of
the eigenspace is equal to the multiplicity for all eigenvalues.
NOTE CONF
But we're missing out on eigenvalues.
And so the matrix is not diagonalisable.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that was one of the points that I was
NOTE CONF
really hoping to make during this, uh, during this lecture.
And again, the catch must factor completely.
NOTE CONF
And we can have this counterexample here.
If you write down the determinant of that matrix, you
NOTE CONF
get, uh, uh, this, uh, this expression here and the
characteristic polynomial only has uh, one root which is uh
NOTE CONF
x equal one.
And you do that by putting x minus on the
NOTE CONF
on the diagonal and expanding over the third row, you
get x minus one and then x squared plus one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this matrix here in principle satisfy the right hand
NOTE CONF
side condition here.
The dimension of the eigenspace we will check has multiplicity
NOTE CONF
one.
But because it doesn't have a full set of eigenvectors
NOTE CONF
corresponding to our spanning R3, it won't be, um, it
won't be, um, won't be diagonalisable.
NOTE CONF
Uh, the eigenspace corresponding to that eigenvalue is spanned by
this vector here.
NOTE CONF
And so the dimension is one.
And note that this is an if and only if.
NOTE CONF
So.
For this to be true we must be able to
NOTE CONF
suppose that if if the dimension equals the multiplicity of
lambda, then a is diagonalisable.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Do you have any question about this question here?
NOTE CONF
Because because the next remark is a consequence but mostly
unrelated.
NOTE CONF
So this would be a good time.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Well in that case let's have a look at the
characteristic polynomial once again.
NOTE CONF
Uh what is what does it mean to factor completely.
Well I've written it down earlier, but um.
NOTE CONF
It, it you can rephrase that as meaning that the
sum of the multiplicity of the eigenvalues are equal to
NOTE CONF
the matrix dimension.
And, uh, and let's see why very quickly, if it
NOTE CONF
factors completely, we know that we can, uh, that we
can write it as a product of first order terms
NOTE CONF
raised to some powers.
And of course lambda one to lambda m will be
NOTE CONF
our eigenvalues.
And because the characteristic polynomial has degree equal to the
NOTE CONF
dimension of the matrix, we know that the sum of
all these n's and one plus n two plus n
NOTE CONF
that must be less than or equal to n, right?
Because if there are some was greater than end and
NOTE CONF
this would be an n plus something degree polynomial.
And that's not possible because the characteristic polynomial is at
NOTE CONF
most the dimension of the matrix.
So we really have only two options.
NOTE CONF
And we can either have the exact like strictly smaller
than or equal to n.
NOTE CONF
And if it's smaller than n then it means that
there's that.
NOTE CONF
We're missing some factor here, because the degree of the
polynomial on the right hand side will be n one
NOTE CONF
plus n two plus n n, and we know that
the degree of the polynomial on the right hand side
NOTE CONF
on the left hand side, sorry, is n because it's
the characteristic polynomial.
NOTE CONF
And so we're missing one of those factors in the
form like this.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Because if if the remaining degrees on the right hand
NOTE CONF
side would have been written in this form here as
x minus lambda n plus one and n plus one,
NOTE CONF
it would be in this in this form already it
would be included in this product.
NOTE CONF
But it's not.
So I'm missing out on on an factor that I
NOTE CONF
can factor that I can factorise completely.
And so the fact that the, the, the sum of
NOTE CONF
the multiplicity of the eigenvalues is strictly less than the
size of the matrix implies that I'm, I'm leaving out
NOTE CONF
one of those factors that prevents me to factor completely
the polynomial, and vice versa.
NOTE CONF
If n one N1 plus n2 plus n m already
give me a polynomial of degree n, then I can't
NOTE CONF
have any more factor that can create me problem with
factorising completely the polynomial, right?
NOTE CONF
Because the factors that I have already written in already
account for the maximum degree that the polynomial can be.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so I put this remark here mostly because, uh,
it's uh, something that uh, I use to build that,
NOTE CONF
uh, counterexample to number one.
It's a counterexample I've built by selecting a matrix that
NOTE CONF
had exactly one of these terms here, and a non
factorising term, and exploiting the fact that the multiplicity doesn't
NOTE CONF
add up to the dimension of the space in which
the matrix acts, which in our example here was of
NOTE CONF
course R3.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
So that first one, if you just added the characteristic
NOTE CONF
polynomial factorises completely, it would be true.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
It's a it's a.
If you go back and read the theorem we had
NOTE CONF
it in the previous slide.
The theorem goes like um.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Can find it now.
NOTE CONF
Oh yes.
There it is.
NOTE CONF
The following are equivalent for a square matrix for which
the characteristic polynomial k of x factor is completely right.
NOTE CONF
So if you add that then you can prove it
this by looking at this uh theorem which again I
NOTE CONF
lifted straight from the writing.
So it's in section 5.5 somewhere.
NOTE CONF
But here I didn't include it.
And so I could build I could build the counterexample
NOTE CONF
that way.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, where were we.
This is still question one.
NOTE CONF
Question two.
Remark.
NOTE CONF
Okay Number two, if the eigenvectors of a, uh, error
are n times n.
NOTE CONF
Oh, my God, I'm sorry.
Spun our n, so do the ones of a minus
NOTE CONF
one.
Um, you're pretty much okay.
NOTE CONF
There's there's a tendency towards being this being true.
Uh, we're going to do a raise of hands for
NOTE CONF
number three.
This is indeed true.
NOTE CONF
Uh, why?
Well, um, let's pick the eigenvalues of A.
NOTE CONF
We know that they span RN, and for all the
eigenvectors, we get this equation here, which, um, uh, we
NOTE CONF
can multiply by a minus one.
Uh, again, if I give you a minus one in
NOTE CONF
the in the hypothesis, it's, uh, it's implied that A's
is diagonalisable.
NOTE CONF
And it's also implied by the fact that the eigenvectors
span.
NOTE CONF
So um, we can multiply by a minus one, which
exist, and we get, uh, what do we get?
NOTE CONF
We get a minus one A on one side and
lambda a minus one v, I can simplify a minus
NOTE CONF
one a on one side.
Divide by lambda and I get a swap sides here.
NOTE CONF
This this used to be this part here multiplied by
a minus one on the left.
NOTE CONF
And I also divide it by lambda.
So here what I'm left is a minus one lambda
NOTE CONF
divided by lambda goes away v.
So a minus one v.
NOTE CONF
And here I have a minus one a goes away
as the identity one over lambda v.
NOTE CONF
And so one minus lambda is an eigenvalue of a
minus one which we don't particularly care about.
NOTE CONF
But crucially it has the same eigenvector v.
And this is true for all pair of eigenvalues eigenvectors
NOTE CONF
of a minus one.
And so a minus one will also have uh, eigenvectors
NOTE CONF
that span RN because it will be the same.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So.
I don't know where the duplicates come, uh, came from.
NOTE CONF
Uh, number three, the sum of the eigenvalue multiplicities of
an uh n times n matrix sums to n.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This one, it's good that I gave you, uh, before
NOTE CONF
the remark.
This is essentially the remark that we have just shown.
NOTE CONF
That is false.
It's not really true.
NOTE CONF
Uh, the same counterexample that I used for the first
one also applies to this one here.
NOTE CONF
Um, again, this is exactly what we've proven in the
remark.
NOTE CONF
Uh, this is if and only if the polynomial of
the matrix factors completely.
NOTE CONF
If it doesn't factor is completely.
We're missing out.
NOTE CONF
Non factorised terms that make it so that the some
of the uh the, some of the multiplicities is strictly
NOTE CONF
less than em.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Any questions?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
I want to understand the formal definition of, uh, an
eigenvalue.
NOTE CONF
Because if we see it as a root of the
characteristic polynomial, then the statement is true, because the sum
NOTE CONF
of the multiplicity of all the roots of the polynomial
is the degree of the polynomial.
NOTE CONF
That is not true.
That is true only if you're if you can factorise
NOTE CONF
the polynomial.
But we can't because we're using real numbers.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So it is not true that the polynomial p of
NOTE CONF
x once again x squared plus one.
This has no roots, but has a degree too.
NOTE CONF
Polynomial is any number that makes the polynomial be zero.
So any real number for us, because we're not working
NOTE CONF
on the complex numbers.
We are going to say that, uh, an eigenvalue.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Yes, because we're working with the real numbers on in
NOTE CONF
this course.
But what you're saying is absolutely correct.
NOTE CONF
What this points all all of this points to something
that we're not treating in this course that now if
NOTE CONF
you allow the elements of the matrices and the eigenvalues,
the eigenvalues of the matrices to be complex number, you
NOTE CONF
don't have this problem anymore, because then sure, you can
write this as x minus I and x plus I.
NOTE CONF
And there's actually something called the fundamental theorem of algebra
that says that a polynomial of degree n has roots.
NOTE CONF
And all of these problems go away.
But these problems are created by the fact that we're
NOTE CONF
not allowing a complex number in this course.
And this is also why the section on complex number
NOTE CONF
was excluded from the reading.
So we we have to work with that with that
NOTE CONF
restriction in mind, which is a restriction that makes sense
in some applications.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So it's also useful content mathematically creates problem.
NOTE CONF
It's more elegant to go to complex numbers.
But in some in some application it's a limitation you
NOTE CONF
have to deal with okay.
Anything else.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Have anything to do with how like whether whether the
NOTE CONF
matrix is organised or is it simple like could you
add like if I expected completely.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Uh, if, um, If the sorry if the matrix A
NOTE CONF
if the characteristic polynomial factor is completely.
So yeah.
NOTE CONF
So if somebody argue about it.
And see like the characteristic polynomial factors completely.
NOTE CONF
Does that right.
Like does that tell you anything about how diagonalisable the
NOTE CONF
matrix is or not.
Uh, I would need to think about my first.
NOTE CONF
My first, uh, answer to that is yes.
Then the matrix is diagonalisable.
NOTE CONF
But I'll think about it because I'm not 100% sure
here on the spot.
NOTE CONF
And also we only have two minutes.
So unfortunately I have to go through the fourth statement
NOTE CONF
because there's one last book club for your feedback about
what you're sure, most sure and least sure about because,
NOTE CONF
um, I need to send that data on to Andreas,
who's going to do the the review.
NOTE CONF
So let's have a look at statement number four quickly.
And this one was true.
NOTE CONF
So another one in which most of you got this
wrong.
NOTE CONF
And the proof here is fairly simple in the fact
that you can write the definition of eigenvector of A
NOTE CONF
like this, and you can prove that the same eigenvectors
of A will also be eigenvectors of A plus I
NOTE CONF
with eigenvalue lambda plus one.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, and that comes basically because uh, all vectors are
eigenvectors of the identity matrix because they get transformed to
NOTE CONF
itself.
Ta ta ta themselves.
NOTE CONF
So v is eigenvector of a plus one with eigenvalue
lambda plus one.
NOTE CONF
And so they have the same sets of eigenvectors.
And because the first set spanned r n then the
NOTE CONF
other set which is the same set will also span
the same one as well.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So the last bit is this can take a little
NOTE CONF
bit longer, but I'm going to leave it open until
the over the end of the lesson so it can
NOTE CONF
have a chance of, uh, of doing this.
Um, this is just, uh, it's a 1 to 4.
NOTE CONF
Four means that you're very confident in doing that.
Um, and one means you're not at all confident.
NOTE CONF
And, um, as you can see, this only covers the
some topics from my week.
NOTE CONF
So week for week eight and week nine because it
was responsible for those weeks.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to send uh that data through.
So very important that you get this.
NOTE CONF
And I'm just going to cover.
So you're, uh, completely anonymous.
NOTE CONF
And other than that, it's 1 p.m..
Thank you for coming.
NOTE CONF
And I'll see you all at the tutorials.